# Methods

## Datasets

We selected two datasets on OpenNeuro for the current analysis: 
`ds000228` {cite:p}`ds000228:1.1.0` and `ds000030` {cite:p}`ds000030:1.0.0`.
Dataset `ds000228` contains fMRI scans of participants watching a silent version of Pixar animated movie "Partly Cloudy". 
The dataset includes 33 adult subjects (Age M(s.d.) = 24.8(5.3); range: 18--39; 20 female) and 122 children subjects (Age M(s.d.) = 6.7,(2.3); range: 3.5--12; 64 females).
For more information for the dataset please refers to {cite:p}`richardson_development_2018`.
Dataset `ds000030` includes multiple tasks collected on subjects of a variety of neuropsychiatric diagnostics, including ADHD, bipolar disorder, schizophrenia , and healthy controls. 
The current analysis only focused on the resting state scans, 
resulting 259 subjects in the final analysis.
The demographic information per condition is in the following table.

|                 | Full sample | Healthy control | Schizophrenia | Bipolar disorder |     ADHD    |
|----------------:|------------:|----------------:|--------------:|-----------------:|------------:|
|       N(female) |    259(108) |         120(56) |        50(12) |           49(21) |      40(19) |
| Age Mean(s.d.)  |   33.3(9.3) |      31.7 (8.8) |    36.5 (8.9) |       35.3 (9.0) | 32.1 (10.4) |
|       Age Range |      21--50 |          21--50 |        22--49 |           21--50 |      21--50 |

## fMRI data preprocessing

We preprocessed with fMRIPrep LTS20.2.1 through [`fMRIPrep-slurm`](https://github.com/SIMEXP/fmriprep-slurm) with the following options:
```
--use-aroma \
--omp-nthreads 1 \
--nprocs 1 \
--random-seed 0  \
--output-spaces MNI152NLin2009cAsym MNI152NLin6Asym \
--output-layout bids \
--notrack \
--skip_bids_validation \
--write-graph \
--omp-nthreads 1 \
--nprocs 1 \
--resource-monitor
```

For the full description generated by fMRIPrep, please see [supplemental material](./supplemental_material.md). 

## Time series extraction and connectome generation

We extract time series with regions of interest (ROI) defined by the following atlases:
Gordon atlas {cite:p}`gordon_atlas_2014`, 
Schaefer 7 network atlas {cite:p}`schaefer_local-global_2017`, 
Multiresolution Intrinsic Segmentation Template (MIST) {cite:p}`urchs_mist_2019`,
and Dictionary of Functional Modes (DiFuMo){cite:p}`difumo_2020`.
All atlases were resampled to the resolution of the preprocessed functional data.

Further ROI extraction was done on DiFuMo and MIST, 
because area under the same label can be networks with disjointed regions.
We present the labels with the original number of parcel, 
and denote the number of extracted ROI in brackets. 
Gordon and Schaefer atlas both comes with parcels as isolated ROI hence were applied as it is in the extraction.
Schaefer 1000 parcels atlas was excluded as some regions would be dropped after resampling. 

- Gordon atlas: 333 
- Schaefer atlas: 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 800
- Multiresolution Intrinsic Segmentation Template (MIST) {cite:p}`urchs_mist_2019`: 7, 12, 20, 36, 64, 122, 197, 325, 444, "ROI" (210 parcels, 122 splitted by the midline)
- DiFuMo atlas {cite:p}`difumo_2020`: 64 (114), 128 (200), 256 (372), 512 (637), 1024 (1158)

Process involved here are implemented through nilearn {cite:p}`nilearn_2014`.
Time series were extracted using `nilearn.maskers.NiftiLabelsMasker` and `nilearn.maskers.NiftiMapsMasker`. 
Connectomes were calculated using Pearson's Correlations, implemented through `nilearn.connectome.ConnectivityMeasure`.


## Confound regression strategies

We evaluated common confound regression strategies that are possible through fMRIPrep generated confound regressors. 
Subjects with high motion, indicated by less than 80% of remaining volumes after scrubbing with a 0.5 mm threshold, were excluded from all analysis. 
Confound variables were accessed using API `nilearn.interfaces.fmriprep.load_confounds_strategy`.
The API implemented four common strategies: 
`simple` {cite:p}`fox_pnas_2005` (motion parameters, and tissue signal), 
`scrubbing` {cite:p}`power_scrubbing_2012`(volume censoring, motion parameters, and tissue signal),
`compcor` {cite:p}`behzadi_compcor_2007`(anatomical compcor and motion parameters),
and `aroma` {cite:p}`pruim_ICAAROMA_2015`(ICA-AROMA based denoising, and tissue signal).
All strategies but `compcor` provides an option to add global signal to the confound regressors.
The connectome generated from high-pass filtered time series were served as a comparison baseline.
A full breakdown of parameters used under the hood is presented in the table below.

| strategy   | image                          | `high_pass` | `motion` | `wm_csf` | `global_signal` | `scrub` | `fd_thresh` | `compcor`       | `n_compcor` | `ica_aroma` | `demean` |
|------------|--------------------------------|-------------|----------|----------|-----------------|---------|-------------|-----------------|-------------|-------------|----------|
| baseline   | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | N/A      | N/A      | N/A             | N/A     | N/A         | N/A             | N/A         | N/A         | `True`   |
| simple     | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | `basic`  | N/A             | N/A     | N/A         | N/A             | N/A         | N/A         | `True`   |
| simple+gsr | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | `basic`  | `basic`         | N/A     | N/A         | N/A             | N/A         | N/A         | `True`   |
| scrubbing  | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | `full`   | N/A             | `5`     | `0.5`       | N/A             | N/A         | N/A         | `True`   |
| simple+gsr | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | `full`   | `basic`         | `5`     | `0.5`       | N/A             | N/A         | N/A         | `True`   |
| compcor    | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | N/A      | N/A             | N/A     | N/A         | `anat_combined` | `all`       | N/A         | `True`   |
| compcor6   | `desc-preproc_bold`            | `True`      | `full`   | N/A      | N/A             | N/A     | N/A         | `anat_combined` | `6 `        | N/A         | `True`   |
| aroma      | `desc-smoothAROMAnonaggr_bold` | `True`      | N/A      | `basic`  | N/A             | N/A     | N/A         | N/A             | N/A         | `full`      | `True`   |
| aroma+gsr  | `desc-smoothAROMAnonaggr_bold` | `True`      | N/A      | `basic`  | `basic`         | N/A     | N/A         | N/A             | N/A         | `full`      | `True`   |

## Denoising evaluation measures

We used three metrics {cite:p}`ciric_benchmarking_2017`, {cite:p}`parkes_evaluation_2018` described in the previous literature to evaluate the denoising results. 
Motion related metrics are centred around framewise displacement.
Framewise displacement (FD) indexes the movement of the head from one volume to the next.
The movement includes the transitions on the three axises ($x$, $y$, $z$) and the respective rotation ($\alpha$, $\beta_t$, $\gamma$).
Rotational displacements are calculated as the displacement on the surface of a sphere of radius 50 mm {cite}`power_scrubbing_2012`.
fMRIPrep genetates the FD based on the formula proposed in {cite}`power_scrubbing_2012`.
The FD at each time point $t$ is expressed as:

$$
\text{FD}_t = |\Delta d_{x,t}| + |\Delta d_{y,t}| +
|\Delta d_{z,t}| + |\Delta \alpha_t| + |\Delta \beta_t| + |\Delta \gamma_t|
$$

The details of each measures are explained as followed.

### Quality control / functional connectivity (QC-FC {cite:p}`power_recent_2015`)

QC-FC quantifies the correlation between mean FD and functional connectivity.
This is calculated by a partial correlation between mean FD and connectivity with age and sex as covariates. 
The denoising methods should aim to reduce the QC-FC value.
The significants values reported are control for multiple comparisons with false positive rate correction.

### Distance-dependent effects of motion on connectivity {cite:p}`power_scrubbing_2012`

To determine the residual distance-dependence of subject movement, 
we first calculate the Euclidean distance between the centers of mass of ecah pair of parcels. 
We then correlated the distance separating each pair of parcels and the associated QC-FC correlation of the edge connecting those parcels.
Closer parcels generally exhibiting greater impact of motion on connectivity. 
We expect to see a general trend of negative correlation to no correlation after confound regression.

### Network modularity {cite:p}`satterthwaite_impact_2012`

Confound regressors has the potential to remove real signal in addition to motion-related noise. 
In order to evaluate this possibility, we computed modularity quality, 
an explicit quantification of the degree to which there are structured sub-networks in a given network, 
in this case the de-noised connectome.
Modularity quality is quantified by graph community detection based on Louvain method {cite:p}`rubinov2010`,
implemented in the Brain Connectome Toolbox.
If confound regression and censoring were removing real signal in addition to motion-related noise, 
we expect that modularity would decline.
To understand the extend of correlation between modularity and motion. 
we computed the partial correlation between subjects' modularity values and mean FD, 
with age and sex as covariates. 
